README.md, before:

# Multilingual Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) System

A sophisticated multilingual RAG system designed to answer questions from Bengali and English educational content, specifically optimized for processing PDF textbooks and extracting MCQ answers.

## 🌟 Features

- **Multilingual Support**: Handles both Bengali (বাংলা) and English text
- **PDF Processing**: OCR-based text extraction from PDF documents
- **Intelligent Chunking**: Smart text segmentation with overlap for better context
- **Multiple Retrieval Methods**: L2, Dot Product, and Cosine similarity search
- **MCQ Answer Extraction**: Automatic extraction of multiple-choice question answers
- **Web Interface**: Streamlit-based user interface
- **REST API**: FastAPI backend for programmatic access
- **Performance Evaluation**: Built-in evaluation framework

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system consists of several components:

1. **Core RAG Engine** (`main.py`): Main processing pipeline
2. **FastAPI Backend** (`app.py`): REST API server
3. **Streamlit UI** (`rag_ui.py`): Web-based user interface
4. **Evaluation Framework** (`eval.py`): Performance assessment tools
5. **Artifact Builder** (`build_artifacts.py`): Preprocessing utilities

## 📋 Prerequisites

### System Requirements
- Python 3.10+
- Windows OS (configured for Windows paths)
- 4GB+ RAM recommended

### External Dependencies
- **Poppler**: PDF processing library
  - Download from: https://poppler.freedesktop.org/
  - Install to: `C:\poppler\Library\bin`
  
- **Tesseract OCR**: Text recognition engine
  - Download from: https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki
  - Install to: `C:\Program Files\Tesseract-OCR\`
  - Install Bengali language pack

### API Keys
- **OpenAI API Key**: Required for embeddings and text generation
  - Get from: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
  - Add to `.env` file: `OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here`

## 🚀 Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd "Multilingual Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) System"
   ```

2. **Create virtual environment**
   ```bash
   python -m venv env
   env\Scripts\activate  # Windows
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r env/requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Set up environment variables**
   ```bash
   # Create .env file in the env directory
   echo OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key_here > env/.env
   ```

5. **Prepare your PDF document**
   - Place your PDF file in the `env/` directory
   - Update `PDF_PATH` in `main.py` if using a different filename

## 📖 Usage

### 1. Command Line Interface

Run the main RAG system:
```bash
cd env
python main.py
```

This will:
- Extract text from the PDF using OCR
- Chunk the text into manageable segments
- Generate embeddings using OpenAI
- Build FAISS indices for different similarity metrics
- Start an interactive query loop

### 2. Web Interface

Start the FastAPI backend:
```bash
cd env
uvicorn app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

In another terminal, start the Streamlit UI:
```bash
cd env
streamlit run rag_ui.py
```

Access the web interface at: `http://localhost:8501`

### 3. REST API

The FastAPI server provides these endpoints:

- `GET /`: API information and usage examples
- `POST /query`: Submit questions and get answers

Example API call:
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/query" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"question": "বিয়ের সময় কল্যাণীর প্রকৃত বয়স কত ছিল?", "top_k": 3}'
```

### 4. Evaluation

Run performance evaluation:
```bash
cd env
python eval.py
```

### 5. Build Artifacts

Pre-process and save embeddings for faster startup:
```bash
cd env
python build_artifacts.py
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Text Processing
- **Chunk Size**: Default 1000 characters (configurable in `split_into_chunks()`)
- **Chunk Overlap**: Default 500 characters for better context continuity
- **OCR Language**: Bengali (`ben`) + English (`eng`) support

### Retrieval Settings
- **Top-k Results**: Configurable number of retrieved chunks (default: 5)
- **Similarity Metrics**: L2, Dot Product, Cosine similarity
- **Embedding Model**: OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small` (1536 dimensions)

### Generation Settings
- **LLM Model**: GPT-4o for answer generation
- **System Prompt**: Optimized for Bengali MCQ answering

## 📊 Performance

The system includes evaluation metrics:
- **Average Top-1 Similarity**: Retrieval quality measure
- **Grounded Recall@k**: Percentage of queries where ground truth is found in top-k results

## 🛠️ Customization

### Adding New Languages
1. Install Tesseract language packs
2. Update OCR language parameter in `extract_text_from_pdf()`
3. Modify text chunking regex patterns if needed

### Using Different PDFs
1. Replace the PDF file in the `env/` directory
2. Update `PDF_PATH` variable in the relevant scripts
3. Re-run the processing pipeline

### Custom Embedding Models
1. Modify `embed_chunks_openai()` function
2. Update embedding dimensions in FAISS index creation
3. Adjust similarity search parameters

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Poppler not found**
   - Ensure Poppler is installed at `C:\poppler\Library\bin`
   - Add to system PATH if needed

2. **Tesseract not found**
   - Verify Tesseract installation at `C:\Program Files\Tesseract-OCR\`
   - Install Bengali language pack

3. **OpenAI API errors**
   - Check API key in `.env` file
   - Verify API key has sufficient credits
   - Check rate limiting

4. **Memory issues**
   - Reduce chunk size for large documents
   - Use smaller embedding models
   - Process documents in batches

### Debug Mode
Enable verbose logging by modifying the print statements in the code or adding logging configuration.

## 🧑‍💻 Technical Approach & Design Decisions

### 1. What method or library did you use to extract the text, and why? Did you face any formatting challenges with the PDF content?
I used the **PyMuPDF** (`fitz`) library for text extraction from PDFs. PyMuPDF is robust and handles a wide range of PDF layouts, including those with complex formatting, images, and multi-column text. It outperforms alternatives like `pdfminer` or `PyPDF2` for our use case. 

**Formatting Challenges:** PDF files often have inconsistent layouts (headers, footers, columns), which can break sentences or introduce extra line breaks. I addressed this by post-processing the extracted text to merge lines and remove extra whitespace, but some minor artifacts may remain.

### 2. What chunking strategy did you choose (e.g. paragraph-based, sentence-based, character limit)? Why do you think it works well for semantic retrieval?
I use a **sentence-based chunking strategy**, grouping a fixed number of sentences (e.g., 3-5) into each chunk. This ensures each chunk contains a complete thought, improving semantic retrieval. Paragraph-based chunking can be inconsistent, and character-limit chunking may split sentences awkwardly. Sentence-based chunks maintain context and coherence, which helps the retrieval model match queries to relevant information more accurately.

### 3. What embedding model did you use? Why did you choose it? How does it capture the meaning of the text?
I use the **OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small`** model (via the OpenAI API) for generating embeddings. This model is fast, multilingual, and provides strong performance for semantic similarity tasks. It encodes sentences and paragraphs into dense vectors that reflect their meaning, allowing for effective semantic search across both Bengali and English content.

### 4. How are you comparing the query with your stored chunks? Why did you choose this similarity method and storage setup?
I compare the query embedding with stored chunk embeddings using **cosine similarity** (and also support L2 and dot product). Embeddings are stored in a **FAISS** index for efficient large-scale vector search. Cosine similarity is widely used for semantic search, as it measures the angle between vectors, reflecting their semantic similarity regardless of length. FAISS enables fast retrieval even with thousands of chunks.

### 5. How do you ensure that the question and the document chunks are compared meaningfully? What would happen if the query is vague or missing context?
I use the same embedding model for both queries and document chunks, ensuring they are represented in the same semantic space. This allows for direct and meaningful comparison. If a query is vague or lacks context, the retrieval may return less relevant chunks, as the model relies on semantic similarity. For best results, users should provide as much context as possible in their queries.

### 6. Do the results seem relevant? If not, what might improve them (e.g. better chunking, better embedding model, larger document)?
The results are generally relevant, especially for well-formed, context-rich queries. If results are not satisfactory, improvements could include:
- Using a more advanced embedding model (e.g., `all-mpnet-base-v2` or domain-specific models)
- Adjusting the chunking strategy (e.g., overlapping or dynamic chunk sizes)
- Expanding the document set or including more context in each chunk
- Fine-tuning the retrieval pipeline based on user feedback

## 🗂️ Assets Folder

The `assets/` directory contains example questions and response outputs to help you understand the system's capabilities and expected results. These include:

- `FastApi.JPG`: Example of the FastAPI interface in use
- `Question_answer.JPG`: Sample question and answer output
- `Question_answer2.JPG`: Another example of question and answer output

You can refer to these images for a visual demonstration of the system's input and output.

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- OpenAI for embedding and generation APIs
- FAISS for efficient similarity search
- Tesseract for OCR capabilities
- FastAPI and Streamlit for web interfaces

## 📞 Support

For issues and questions:
1. Check the troubleshooting section
2. Review existing GitHub issues
3. Create a new issue with detailed information

---

**Note**: This system is specifically optimized for Bengali educational content but can be adapted for other languages and document types.

Commit message:

Update README to document langdetect and add English response example image

README.md, after:

# Multilingual Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) System

A sophisticated multilingual RAG system designed to answer questions from Bengali and English educational content, specifically optimized for processing PDF textbooks and extracting MCQ answers.

## 🌟 Features

- **Multilingual Support**: Handles both Bengali (বাংলা) and English text, with improved prompt selection for accurate answers in both languages (uses `langdetect` for automatic language detection)
- **PDF Processing**: OCR-based text extraction from PDF documents
- **Intelligent Chunking**: Smart text segmentation with overlap for better context
- **Multiple Retrieval Methods**: L2, Dot Product, and Cosine similarity search
- **MCQ Answer Extraction**: Automatic extraction of multiple-choice question answers
- **Web Interface**: Streamlit-based user interface
- **REST API**: FastAPI backend for programmatic access
- **Performance Evaluation**: Built-in evaluation framework

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system consists of several components:

1. **Core RAG Engine** (`main.py`): Main processing pipeline
2. **FastAPI Backend** (`app.py`): REST API server
3. **Streamlit UI** (`rag_ui.py`): Web-based user interface
4. **Evaluation Framework** (`eval.py`): Performance assessment tools
5. **Artifact Builder** (`build_artifacts.py`): Preprocessing utilities

## 📋 Prerequisites

### System Requirements
- Python 3.10+
- Windows OS (configured for Windows paths)
- 4GB+ RAM recommended

### External Dependencies
- **Poppler**: PDF processing library
  - Download from: https://poppler.freedesktop.org/
  - Install to: `C:\poppler\Library\bin`
  
- **Tesseract OCR**: Text recognition engine
  - Download from: https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki
  - Install to: `C:\Program Files\Tesseract-OCR\`
  - Install Bengali language pack

### API Keys
- **OpenAI API Key**: Required for embeddings and text generation
  - Get from: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
  - Add to `.env` file: `OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here`

## 🚀 Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd "Multilingual Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) System"
   ```

2. **Create virtual environment**
   ```bash
   python -m venv env
   env\Scripts\activate  # Windows
   ```

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r env/requirements.txt
   ```
   
   The system uses the [`langdetect`](https://pypi.org/project/langdetect/) Python package to automatically detect the language of user questions and select the appropriate prompt for Bengali or English. This enables accurate multilingual support.

4. **Set up environment variables**
   ```bash
   # Create .env file in the env directory
   echo OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key_here > env/.env
   ```

5. **Prepare your PDF document**
   - Place your PDF file in the `env/` directory
   - Update `PDF_PATH` in `main.py` if using a different filename

## 📖 Usage

### 1. Command Line Interface

Run the main RAG system:
```bash
cd env
python main.py
```

This will:
- Extract text from the PDF using OCR
- Chunk the text into manageable segments
- Generate embeddings using OpenAI
- Build FAISS indices for different similarity metrics
- Start an interactive query loop

### 2. Web Interface

Start the FastAPI backend:
```bash
cd env
uvicorn app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

In another terminal, start the Streamlit UI:
```bash
cd env
streamlit run rag_ui.py
```

Access the web interface at: `http://localhost:8501`

#### Example: English Question Response

The system now supports accurate responses to English questions as well as Bengali. See the example below:

![English Response Example](assets/Question_answer_English.JPG)

### 3. REST API

The FastAPI server provides these endpoints:

- `GET /`: API information and usage examples
- `POST /query`: Submit questions and get answers

Example API call:
```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/query" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"question": "বিয়ের সময় কল্যাণীর প্রকৃত বয়স কত ছিল?", "top_k": 3}'
```

### 4. Evaluation

Run performance evaluation:
```bash
cd env
python eval.py
```

### 5. Build Artifacts

Pre-process and save embeddings for faster startup:
```bash
cd env
python build_artifacts.py
```

## 🔧 Configuration

### Text Processing
- **Chunk Size**: Default 1000 characters (configurable in `split_into_chunks()`)
- **Chunk Overlap**: Default 500 characters for better context continuity
- **OCR Language**: Bengali (`ben`) + English (`eng`) support

### Retrieval Settings
- **Top-k Results**: Configurable number of retrieved chunks (default: 5)
- **Similarity Metrics**: L2, Dot Product, Cosine similarity
- **Embedding Model**: OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small` (1536 dimensions)

### Generation Settings
- **LLM Model**: GPT-4o for answer generation
- **System Prompt**: Optimized for Bengali MCQ answering

## 📊 Performance

The system includes evaluation metrics:
- **Average Top-1 Similarity**: Retrieval quality measure
- **Grounded Recall@k**: Percentage of queries where ground truth is found in top-k results

## 🛠️ Customization

### Adding New Languages
1. Install Tesseract language packs
2. Update OCR language parameter in `extract_text_from_pdf()`
3. Modify text chunking regex patterns if needed

### Using Different PDFs
1. Replace the PDF file in the `env/` directory
2. Update `PDF_PATH` variable in the relevant scripts
3. Re-run the processing pipeline

### Custom Embedding Models
1. Modify `embed_chunks_openai()` function
2. Update embedding dimensions in FAISS index creation
3. Adjust similarity search parameters

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Poppler not found**
   - Ensure Poppler is installed at `C:\poppler\Library\bin`
   - Add to system PATH if needed

2. **Tesseract not found**
   - Verify Tesseract installation at `C:\Program Files\Tesseract-OCR\`
   - Install Bengali language pack

3. **OpenAI API errors**
   - Check API key in `.env` file
   - Verify API key has sufficient credits
   - Check rate limiting

4. **Memory issues**
   - Reduce chunk size for large documents
   - Use smaller embedding models
   - Process documents in batches

### Debug Mode
Enable verbose logging by modifying the print statements in the code or adding logging configuration.

## 🧑‍💻 Technical Approach & Design Decisions

### 1. What method or library did you use to extract the text, and why? Did you face any formatting challenges with the PDF content?
I used the **PyMuPDF** (`fitz`) library for text extraction from PDFs. PyMuPDF is robust and handles a wide range of PDF layouts, including those with complex formatting, images, and multi-column text. It outperforms alternatives like `pdfminer` or `PyPDF2` for our use case. 

**Formatting Challenges:** PDF files often have inconsistent layouts (headers, footers, columns), which can break sentences or introduce extra line breaks. I addressed this by post-processing the extracted text to merge lines and remove extra whitespace, but some minor artifacts may remain.

### 2. What chunking strategy did you choose (e.g. paragraph-based, sentence-based, character limit)? Why do you think it works well for semantic retrieval?
I use a **sentence-based chunking strategy**, grouping a fixed number of sentences (e.g., 3-5) into each chunk. This ensures each chunk contains a complete thought, improving semantic retrieval. Paragraph-based chunking can be inconsistent, and character-limit chunking may split sentences awkwardly. Sentence-based chunks maintain context and coherence, which helps the retrieval model match queries to relevant information more accurately.

### 3. What embedding model did you use? Why did you choose it? How does it capture the meaning of the text?
I use the **OpenAI `text-embedding-3-small`** model (via the OpenAI API) for generating embeddings. This model is fast, multilingual, and provides strong performance for semantic similarity tasks. It encodes sentences and paragraphs into dense vectors that reflect their meaning, allowing for effective semantic search across both Bengali and English content.

### 4. How are you comparing the query with your stored chunks? Why did you choose this similarity method and storage setup?
I compare the query embedding with stored chunk embeddings using **cosine similarity** (and also support L2 and dot product). Embeddings are stored in a **FAISS** index for efficient large-scale vector search. Cosine similarity is widely used for semantic search, as it measures the angle between vectors, reflecting their semantic similarity regardless of length. FAISS enables fast retrieval even with thousands of chunks.

### 5. How do you ensure that the question and the document chunks are compared meaningfully? What would happen if the query is vague or missing context?
I use the same embedding model for both queries and document chunks, ensuring they are represented in the same semantic space. This allows for direct and meaningful comparison. If a query is vague or lacks context, the retrieval may return less relevant chunks, as the model relies on semantic similarity. For best results, users should provide as much context as possible in their queries.

### 6. Do the results seem relevant? If not, what might improve them (e.g. better chunking, better embedding model, larger document)?
The results are generally relevant, especially for well-formed, context-rich queries. If results are not satisfactory, improvements could include:
- Using a more advanced embedding model (e.g., `all-mpnet-base-v2` or domain-specific models)
- Adjusting the chunking strategy (e.g., overlapping or dynamic chunk sizes)
- Expanding the document set or including more context in each chunk
- Fine-tuning the retrieval pipeline based on user feedback

## 🗂️ Assets Folder

The `assets/` directory contains example questions and response outputs to help you understand the system's capabilities and expected results. These include:

- `FastApi.JPG`: Example of the FastAPI interface in use
- `Question_answer.JPG`: Sample Bangla question and answer output
- `Question_answer2.JPG`: Another example of Bangla question and answer output

You can refer to these images for a visual demonstration of the system's input and output.

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- OpenAI for embedding and generation APIs
- FAISS for efficient similarity search
- Tesseract for OCR capabilities
- FastAPI and Streamlit for web interfaces

## 📞 Support

For issues and questions:
1. Check the troubleshooting section
2. Review existing GitHub issues
3. Create a new issue with detailed information

---

**Note**: This system is specifically optimized for Bengali educational content but can be adapted for other languages and document types.
